%----Goedel's Ontological Proof of the Existence of God
%----Authors: Christoph Benzmueller and Bruno Woltzenlogel-Paleo
%----July, 16 2013 (update on August 10, 2013)

We present a formalization and (partial) automation of Goedel's
ontological argument in quantified modal logic KB (QML KB). QML KB is in 
turn modeled as a fragment of Church's simple type theory (HOL). Thus, the
formalization is essentially a formalization in HOL. For our encoding
of HOL formulas we employ the TPTP THF0 syntax. 

For more information on this syntax we refer to:
-- Automated Reasoning in Higher-Order Logic using the TPTP THF 
   Infrastructure (Geoff Sutcliffe, Christoph Benzmüller), In Journal 
   of Formalized Reasoning, volume 3, number 1, pp. 1-27, 2010.
   http://jfr.unibo.it/article/view/1710/1179

The employed embedding of QML in HOL is adapting the ideas as presented in: 
-- Quantified Multimodal Logics in Simple Type Theory (Christoph Benzmueller, 
   Lawrence Paulson), In Logica Universalis (Special Issue on Multimodal 
   Logics), volume 7, number 1, pp. 7-20, 2013. 
and in 
-- Exploring Properties of Normal Multimodal Logics in Simple Type Theory 
   with LEO-II (Christoph Benzmueller, Lawrence Paulson), Chapter in Reasoning 
   in Simple Type Theory --- Festschrift in Honor of Peter B. Andrews on His 
   70th Birthday (Christoph Benzmueller, Chad Brown, Joerg Siekmann, Richard 
   Statman, eds.), College Publications, Studies in Logic, Mathematical Logic 
   and Foundations, pp. 386-406, 2008.

Note that our QML formalization employs quantification over individuals and 
quantification over sets of individuals.


Dana Scott's version of Goedel's proof employs the following axioms (A), 
definitions (D), corollaries (C) and theorems (T), and it proceeds in the 
following order:

A1 Either a property or its negation is positive, but not both
A2 A property necessarily implied by a positive property is positive
T1 Positive properties are possibly exemplified: 
D1 A God-like being possesses all positive properties
A3 The property of being God-like is positive
C  Possibly, God exists
A4 Positive properties are necessarily positive
D2 An essence of an individual is a property possessed by it and 
   necessarily implying any of its properties
T2 Being God-like is an essence of any God-like being
D3 Necessary existence of an individual is the necessary exemplification 
   of all its essences 
A5 Necessary existence is a positive property. 
T3 Necessarily, God exists.


Automated theorem provers and model finders for HOL (LEO-II, Satallax and 
Nitpick) are employed to:
- show the consistency of the axioms and definitions employed
- to automate the ontological argument in 4 single steps

Moreover, these systems have been used to obtain the following results:
-The basic modal logic K is sufficient for proving T1, C and T2. 
- Modal logic S5 is not needed for proving T3; the logic KB is sufficient. 
- Without the first conjunct in D2 the set of axioms and definitions 
  would be inconsistent. 
- For proving theorem T1, only the left to right direction of axiom A1 is 
  needed. However, the backward direction of A1 is required for proving T2.


Informal explanation of the experiments on Goedel's arguments:

File Consistency.p wrt: The consistency of the set of axioms can be
  shown by Nitrox (Nitpick)

File T1.p (A1, A2 |- T1) This can be proved by LEO-II and Satallax;
  just apply the provers to T1.p Remark: Only the left to right
  direction of A1 is required. Logic K is sufficient.

File C.p: (T1, D1, A3 |- C) This can be proved by LEO-II and
  Satallax; D1 seems not required to obtain C; in a previous version
  A2 was also assumed; A2 is not needed. Logic K is sufficient.

File T2.p (A1, D1, D2, A4 |- T2) This can be proved by LEO-II and
  Satallax; both directions of A1 are required, otherwise Nitrox
  (Nitpick) finds a counterexample. Logic K is sufficient.

File T3.p (D1, C, T2, D3, A5 |- T3) This can be proved by LEO-II and
  Satallax. Logic KB is sufficient. In Logic K Nitrox finds a
  counterexample.

In the experiments above the provers were run with a 60 seconds timeout via 
Geoff Sutcliffe's SystemOnTPTP interface on standard PCs; big thanks to Geoff!

We are currently testing whether T3 can eventually be proved
directly from the axioms and definitions in one step; see file 
T3oneStep.p


Best regards,
   Christoph Benzmueller and Bruno Woltzenlogel-Paleo


